---
author: Asura Enkhbayar
date: 10-11-2018
type: notes
keywords:
---

# Notes after conversation with John Willinsky

Write drafts for the essay with Andrew about the topic scholarly communication and critical technology.

Current idea:

- Citations & Wittgenstein
- Citations & Marcuse
- Citations & Feenberg

John suggested to try to simply work through versions of the text with each framework and simply test various applications.

## About Citation Theory

Cronin suggests that citations are to be understood as a cluster-concept. Various meanings, usages, and
Metaphors for citations:

- as scholarly bricks (Price, 1963)
- as signposts left behind (Smith, 1981)
- as applause (Nelson, 1997),
- as gifts (Hagstrom, 1982),
- as forms of reward or income (Ravetz, 1971),
- as tools of persuasion (Gilbert, 1977),
- as pellets of peer recognition (Merton, 2000),
- as paratextual baubles (Cronin, 2014),
- as frozen footprints on the landscape of scholarly achievement (Cronin, 1981)

"None of the metaphors I just mentioned quite does justice to the complexity of a practice, ...."

Cronin's favourite metaphor: **citations as conversation between texts** by Barbara Czarniawska-Joerges with the qualifier of a "particularly slow, asynchronous conversation".

> Czarniawska-Joerges, B. (1998). Narrative approach to organization studies.

> They changed the process of scholarly communication fundamentally, from personal correspondence through letters (which had become “too much for one man to cope with in his daily reading and correspondence”) [1], society meetings, and books to a more structured and regular distribution of scientific advancements. This structured form, combined with a regular and wide dissemination, enabled systematic recording and archiving of scientific knowledge (Larivière, V., Haustein, S., & Mongeon, P. (2015). The oligopoly of academic publishers in the digital era. PloS one, 10(6), e0127502.)

## Scholarly Communication & Technology

- Genesis of citations
    - History of citation indices
- [Microattribution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microattribution)
- Rationalization and scholarly communication
    - scientometrics
    - altmetrics
    - Review, Promotion, and Tenure
- Technical Determinism
    - What about the determinism of science?
    - How does that relate to scholarly communication the practice of citing?
- Hermeneutics
    - Social meaning and cultural horizon of scholarly communications
        - The meaning of citations/altmetrics might be better explored through the lense of critical theory of technology than the more recent approaches
    - Current scientometrics rush for impact-factors and h-indices fits with a deterministic and functional world view
    - Story of the impact factor and some parallels to the Minitel (and many other technologies).
    - The cultural horizon. The assembly line... social media walls as assembly lines
- Technical code and scholarly communication
    - Publishing and scholarship have their technical code
        - Different citation guidelines...
        - Closed and open peer-review, the publication of manuscripts




## Three perspectives

### Citations and Wittgenstein

I've already presented on Wittgenstein and Scholarly Communication at FORCE11.

Useful to use as a point of departure for understanding citations as a communicative practice.

### Citations and Marcuse

I have decided not to dive into this part.

## Email to Andrew

> I was roughly thinking of looking at scholarly communication through the lense of your critical theory of technology (or another thinker in the class). I have been especially interested in looking at citations as a communicative practice and the new technological developments in scholarship (e.g., hyperlinking, academic social networks, preprints)